Enable GCP global access (#385)
redpanda-data/cloud-docs: modules/networking/pages/byoc/gcp/enable-global-access.adoc

= Create a BYOC Cluster Enabled with Global Access 
:description: Learn how to enable global access for new BYOC and BYOVPC clusters on GCP.

> By default, the seed load balancer for your GCP cluster only accepts connections from the same region where the cluster is deployed. In Redpanda Cloud, the seed load balancer is the bootstrap server address you configure in your clients. If your Redpanda Cloud clients and BYOC or BYOVPC cluster are not all in the same GCP region, you must enable global access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the seed load balancer for a cluster on GCP only accepts connections from the same region where the cluster is deployed. In Redpanda Cloud, the seed load balancer is the bootstrap server address you configure in your clients. If your Redpanda Cloud clients and BYOC or BYOVPC cluster are not all in the same GCP region, you must enable global access.
```

Global access lets the seed load balancer accept connections from clients outside your cluster's region, then route them to the appropriate broker addresses for producing and consuming data. You can enable https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#ilb-global-access[global access^] when you create a new BYOC or BYOVPC cluster on GCP.

> == Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think I'd just bump this up to be the last line in the intro section. It's not really a prerequisite: it's just explaining what you're going to do.

> Global access lets the seed load balancer accept connections from clients outside your cluster's region then route them to the appropriate broker addresses for producing and consuming data. You can enable https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/l7-internal/setting-up-l7-internal#global-access[global access^] when you create a new BYOC or BYOVPC cluster on GCP.

Author: Updated

> Global access lets the seed load balancer accept connections from clients outside your cluster's region then route them to the appropriate broker addresses for producing and consuming data. You can enable https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/l7-internal/setting-up-l7-internal#global-access[global access^] when you create a new BYOC or BYOVPC cluster on GCP.

Author: Added new section

> You can only enable global access as part of cluster creation, and not for running clusters.

Reviewer 2: Should we explain why? Or direct them to customer support to request for existing clusters?

Author: Added Limitations section

== Prerequisites

* In this guide, you use the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to create a resource group, network, and cluster with global access enabled on GCP. Follow the steps on this page to <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token, get an access token>>.

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

== Create a new cluster with global access

=== Create a resource group

Make a request to the `POST /v1/resource-groups` endpoint and store the ID of the resource group you create.

[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=$(curl -X POST \
  https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "resource_group": {
      "name": "<resource-group-name>"
    }
  }' | jq -r '.resource_group.id')
----

If you're creating a BYOVPC cluster, continue to the next section. Otherwise, if you're creating a standard BYOC cluster, skip ahead to <<create-a-network>>.

> === Configure customer-managed resources for BYOVPC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== BYOVPC only: Configure customer-managed resources
```

. Before you proceed, check the xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#prerequisites[prerequisites and limitations] for new BYOVPC clusters on GCP.
. Follow the steps to xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#configure-your-vpc[configure your VPC] with the required permissions and firewall rules.
. Follow the next steps to xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#configure-the-service-project[configure the service project] and service account bindings.

=== Create a network

Make a request to the `POST /v1/networks` endpoint and store the ID of the network you create.

* For standard BYOC clusters, run: 
+

> .Show BYOC network creation example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Show BYOC network creation command
```

[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "network": {
    "name": "<byoc-network-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/20"
  }
}
EOF`

export NETWORK_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks | jq -r '.operation.metadata.network_id')
----
====

* For BYOVPC clusters, you also make a request to the `POST /v1/networks` endpoint, with a different request body:
+

> .Show BYOVPC network creation example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Show BYOVPC network creation command
```

    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "customer_managed_resources": {
        "gcp": {
            "network_name": "<byovpc-network-name>",
            "network_project_id": "<byovpc-network-gcp-project-id>",
            "management_bucket": { "name" : "<byovpc-management-bucket>" }
        }
    }
}
EOF`

export NETWORK_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks | jq -r '.operation.metadata.network_id')
----
+
Replace the following placeholder variables for the request body:
+
--
- `<shared-vpc-name>`: The name for the Redpanda network. 
- `<gcp-region>`: The GCP region where the network will be created.
- `<byovpc-network-gcp-project-id>`: The ID of the GCP project where your VPC is created.
- `<byovpc-network-name>`: The name of your VPC.
- `<byovpc-management-bucket>`: The name of the Google Storage bucket you created for the cluster.
--
====

Note that this endpoint returns a long-running operation. To check the operation state, use the `GET /v1/operations/\{operation_id}` endpoint.

> === Create a cluster with global access enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Enable global access
```

. Make a request to the `POST /v1/clusters` endpoint to create a new cluster with global access enabled.

* For BYOC clusters, run:
+

> .Show BYOC cluster creation example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Show BYOC cluster creation command
```

[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "cluster": {
    "name": "<cluster-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "zones": <gcp-zones>,
    "throughput_tier": "<usage-tier>",
    "gcp_enable_global_access": true
  }
}
EOF`

export CLUSTER_ID=$(curl -X POST \
  https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" | jq -r '.operation.metadata.cluster_id')
----
+
Replace the following placeholder variables for the request body:
+
--
- `<cluster-name>`: The name for the Redpanda cluster.
- `<gcp-region>`: The GCP region where the cluster will be created.
- `<gcp-zones>`: Provide the list of GCP zones where the brokers will be deployed. Format: `["<zone 1>", "<zone 2>", "<zone N>"]`
- `<usage-tier>`: Choose a Redpanda Cloud cluster tier. For example, `tier-1-gcp-v2-x86`.
--
====

* For BYOVPC clusters, you also make a request to the `POST /v1/clusters` endpoint, with a different request body:
+

> .Show BYOVPC cluster creation example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Show BYOVPC cluster creation command
```

[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "cluster": {
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
    "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<cluster-name>",
        "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
        "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
        "region": "<gcp-region>",
        "zones": <gcp-zones>,
        "throughput_tier": "<usage-tier>",
        "redpanda_version": "<redpanda-version>",
        "gcp_enable_global_access": true,

>         "customer_managed_resources": {

Author: Thanks, @frenchfrywpepper ! The challenge here is that the existing BYOVPC docs only describe cluster creation using the UI. For other features where you can either enable/configure it either using the UI or API, we've broken them out into separate docs to keep it easier to both manage and consume. We can look into single sourcing some of this content, though - let me discuss with the team.

>         "customer_managed_resources": {

Reviewer: @frenchfrywpepper, @paulzhang97: If this is the only way it will work for the foreseeable future (i.e., you can only enable it when you create a new cluster), should we just move this into subsections in the existing [Create BYOC/Create BYOVPC pages](https://deploy-preview-385--rp-cloud.netlify.app/redpanda-cloud/get-started/cluster-types/byoc/gcp/)? (The intro could be shared content with link to the API docs for info about getting the access token. This [Networking index page](https://deploy-preview-385--rp-cloud.netlify.app/redpanda-cloud/networking/byoc/gcp/) could add a line describing global access with links to the BYOC/BYOVPC pages for enabling on new clusters, or contact Support for existing clusters?

>         "customer_managed_resources": {

Reviewer 2: That sounds like a good plan to me

>         "customer_managed_resources": {

Author: Created [Jira issue](https://redpandadata.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-1592)

- `<usage-tier>`: Choose a Redpanda Cloud cluster tier. For example, `tier-1-gcp-v2-x86`.
- `<redpanda-version>`: Choose the Redpanda Cloud version.
- `<byovpc-subnet-name>`: The name of the GCP subnet that was created for the cluster.
- `<byovpc-subnet-pods-range-name>`: The name of the IPv4 range designated for K8s pods.
- `<byovpc-subnet-services-range-name>`: The name of the IPv4 range designated for services.
- `<byovpc-subnet-master-range>`: The master IPv4 range.
- `<byovpc-agent-service-acc-email>`: The email for the agent service account.
- `<byovpc-connectors-service-acc-email>`: The email for the connectors service account.
- `<byovpc-console-service-acc-email>`: The email for the Console service account.
- `<byovpc-redpanda-service-acc-email>`: The email for the Redpanda service account.
- `<byovpc-gke-service-acc-email>`: The email for the GKE service account.
- `<byovpc-tiered-storage-bucket>`: The name of the Google Storage bucket to use for Tiered Storage.
--
====

. Run `rpk cloud byoc gcp apply`:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id="${CLUSTER_ID}" --project-id='<gcp-service-project-id>'
```

== Test global access

> To test if global access is successfully enabled, follow the steps in the GCP documentation to https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#gcloud_17[test global access with a VM client^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test if global access is successfully enabled, see the https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#gcloud_17[GCP documentation^].
```
